---
title: playfulness budget
date: 2019-11-06
description: Finding that sweet spot of delight and whimsy in application design
slug: playfulness-budget
image: /assets/playfulness-budget/videophone.jpg
tag: design
updated: 2019-11-29
---

_Homo Ludens_ is a notable work of literature by Dutch philospher Henry Van Friedrick. In it he
argues:

> Play is essential for the building of culture and intellect.

“Play—” that sudden urge you have to jump in that puddle and ruin your shoes. That spark of humor
when you imagine your toaster complaining at you for never cleaning all the crumbs out. When you see
an empty street and decide to run just because “who says I shouldn’t be allowed to run in normal
clothes without a reason?” The sense of play is something we crave on a regular basis—some more than
others—but can be seen as verboten in application design.

There’s some reasonable cause for this feeling—application design does seek to be boring and
predictable. Often I’ve lamented how hard it usually is for print and advertising designers to cross
over into UI, and vice-versa. A magazine cover seeks to disrupt the space around it and draw your
eye—either with boldness in a sea of consistency, or starkness in a sea of boldness; the separation
from the pack is what drives the design. A user interface seeks to be predictable and usable without
a manual, allowing a user to accomplish a complicated task with friendly buttons and maybe an input
or two.

But where do we draw the line? When does “boring” and “predictability” in application design stop
being helpful, and start sucking the life out of an interface?

## 4 ways to spend playfulness points

I typically envision some imaginary bank or budget of playfulness that I draw from. I only have a
few “points” to spend to disrupt a user’s expectations in an application before they get frustrated.
How, and when? Here are 5 tips to spending your few points wisely.

### 1. spend playfulness points during slow tasks

Every user, when using your application, will be in varying states of panic. Typically, the type of
application will lean one way or another.

Booking a hotel, tickets for a show, or flight? These can feel **rushed**, sometimes intentionally,
and even feature anxiety-inducing timers, _BOOK NOW!_ calls to action, and the impending sense that
someone will snag this before you do (_23 people have looked at this Airbnb in the last hour_).

In these situations, it’s probably best not to push the “book” button further down the page with
your wacky promo video—just let the user finish! They’re stressed enough as it is.

But say you’re building an editorial site and a user is casually reading an article at their
leisure. That’s a perfect time for an unexpected page-turning transition. Or a user is shopping for
beds, and you have a “bounce simulator” that shows how much give that mattress has with a fun,
interactive animation. These are all wonderful opportunities to turn a slow experience where a user
has time to spare into a memorable interaction.

### 2. spend playfulness points during frustrating tasks

For a recent [ecommerce site I built][lkg], I wanted to address 2 pain points that are the bane of
my online shopping experience (or one, depending on how you look at it): image carousels and zoom
views.

For some reason, I just find most sites that have these to be buggy, unexpected, and frustrating.
Hoping I wasn’t alone, I decided to introduce a little unpredictability for a little bit of whimsy.

Using the metaphor of a map, I created a carousel that folds and unfolds as you click through it,
animating smoothly between the stops. For the zoom view, on desktop I made the hover interaction
reveal the zoomed-in view without clicking. Quick to navigate, quick to dismiss. And on smaller
devices when you find yourself pinch—zooming anyway, I simply made the image itself high-res, and
disabled the zoom so users can use the natural zoom on their device (I personally find the simulated
zoom, like Twitter’s mobile site, to be buggy, and I always have images flying off into space or
re-centering wildly, which I don’t understand because zooming in on static images works just great).

Perhaps I got a little too anecdotal here, but the main point is: if there’s an interaction that is
typically laden with frustration (date-picking availability, calendars, actually just dates and
times in general are hard…), it may be a good opportunity to turn a bad expectation into an
unexpected joy by making it playful.

### 3. spend playfulness points on first impressions

A user’s first several seconds on a site is a critical time for them. They’re orienting to the
site—to the layout, colors, language, etc.—while also having something they want to accomplish.
While often times this is a winding path for the user to clarify what they want while orienting
themselves to a new interface, that first few seconds that a user suspends judgment can be just the
right moment for playfulness.

Greeting a user, for instance, with a fun animation on page load doesn’t disrupt their task while
they figure out where it is they need to go.

Granted, there are good and bad types of animation. A good animation would simply be adding motion
to the hero graphic, where a bad animation would be hiding the top menu and animating in items
one-by-one so the user has to wait painfully to even start their task. But assuming you executed the
former, setting an impression for playfulness right off the bat can pay dividends later.

### 4.spend playfulness points during successes

As Mailchimp points out in their amazing [writing guide][mc], being flippant or acting exciting
during an error is tone-deaf and can turn users off (personally, I remember seeing an “Oops!” piece
of copy when my internet provider’s profile was down, and the carelessness and complete disregard
for my situation was maddening).

However, successes are something that should be celebrated, and celebrated often. Did a user finish
sending an email? Add a fun illustration and some congratulatory copy on that succes page! Has a
user reached a certain milestone in your app (miles walked, achievement reached, numbers hit)? Send
a fun email or add a badge to their profile.

Studies have shown that unexpected rewards result in the most positively-received experiences. And,
no, we’re not “increasing engagement” or anything like that; we’re simply trying to help the humans
that use our application feel appreciated because they’re worth it.

## how will you spend yours?

An application’s primary purpose is to **help a user accomplish a task, and help them accomplish it
as quickly and effortlessly as possible.** To that end, we must use shared language and rely on a
user’s learned experiences with interfaces to guide them to the finish line as quickly as possible.

But as we’re reminded by _Homo Ludens_, sometimes the most efficent way there isn’t a straight line.
Sometimes the straightest roads can have us feeling sleepy behind the wheel a bit. Sometimes the
little detours, the fun little dips and curves, make the journey provided they don’t add on _too_
much time.

> End quote

[lkg]: https://littleknowngoods.com
[mc]: https://
